
Siemens and Halske T52 - Wikipedia
Jump to content
Main menu
 Main menu
 move to sidebar
 hide
 Navigation
Main page
Contents
Current events
Random article
About Wikipedia
Contact us
 Contribute
Help
Learn to edit
Community portal
Recent changes
Upload file
Special pages
Search
 Search
Appearance
Donate
Create account
Log in
Personal tools
Donate
Create account
Log in
Contents
 move to sidebar
 hide
 (Top)
 1
 Operation
 2
 Models
 3
 Cryptanalysis
 4
 See also
 5
 References
 Toggle References subsection
 5.1
 Citations
 5.2
 Sources
 6
 External links
Toggle the table of contents
Siemens and Halske T52
7 languages
العربية
Català
Deutsch
Français
Norsk bokmål
Русский
Svenska
 Edit links
Article
Talk
 English
Read
Edit
View history
 Tools
 Tools
 move to sidebar
 hide
 Actions
Read
Edit
View history
 General
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Permanent link
Page information
Cite this page
Get shortened URL
Expand all
Edit interlanguage links
 Print/export
Download as PDF
Printable version
 In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikidata item
 Appearance
 move to sidebar
 hide
Text
SmallStandardLargeThis page always uses small font sizeWidth
StandardWideThe content is as wide as possible for your browser window.Color (beta)
AutomaticLightDarkThis page is always in light mode.
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
World War II German cipher machine and teleprinter
"Sturgeon" exhibit at the US National Cryptologic Museum
The Siemens & Halske T52, also known as the Geheimschreiber[1] ("secret teleprinter"), or Schlüsselfernschreibmaschine (SFM), was a World War II German cipher machine and teleprinter produced by the electrical engineering firm Siemens & Halske. The instrument and its traffic were codenamed Sturgeon by British cryptanalysts.
While the Enigma machine was generally used by field units, the T52 was an online machine used by Luftwaffe and German Navy units, which could support the heavy machine, teletypewriter and attendant fixed circuits. It fulfilled a similar role to the Lorenz cipher machines in the German Army.
The British cryptanalysts of Bletchley Park codenamed the German teleprinter ciphers Fish, with individual cipher-systems being given further codenames: just as the T52 was called Sturgeon, the Lorenz machine was codenamed Tunny.
Operation[edit]
The teleprinters of the day emitted each character as five parallel bits on five lines, typically encoded in the Baudot code or something similar. The T52 had ten pinwheels, which were stepped in a complex nonlinear way, based in later models on their positions from various relays in the past, but in such a way that they could never stall. Each of the five plaintext bits was then XORed with the XOR sum of 3 taps from the pinwheels, and then cyclically adjacent pairs of plaintext bits were swapped or not, according to XOR sums of three (different) output bits. The numbers of pins on all the wheels were coprime, and the triplets of bits that controlled each XOR or swap were selectable through a plugboard.
This produced a much more complex cipher than the Lorenz machine, and also means that the T52 is not just a pseudorandom number generator-and-XOR cipher. For example, if a cipher clerk erred and sent two different messages using exactly the same settings—a depth of two in Bletchley jargon—this could be detected statistically but was not immediately and trivially solvable as it would be with the Lorenz.
Models[edit]
A T52d on display at the Imperial War Museum, London.
Siemens produced several and mostly incompatible versions of the T52: the T52a and T52b, which differed only in their electrical noise suppression, and the T52c, T52d and T52e. While the T52a/b and T52c were cryptologically weak, the last two were more advanced devices; the movement of the wheels was intermittent, the decision on whether or not to advance them being controlled by logic circuits which took input data from the wheels themselves.
In addition, a number of conceptual flaws, including very subtle ones, had been eliminated. One such flaw was the ability to reset the keystream to a fixed point, which led to key reuse by undisciplined machine operators.
Cryptanalysis[edit]
Following the occupation of Denmark and Norway, the Germans started to use a teleprinter circuit which ran through Sweden. The Swedes immediately tapped the line, in May 1940, and the mathematician and cryptographer Arne Beurling cracked the two earliest models in two weeks, using just pen and paper (a feat later replicated by Bill Tutte at Bletchley Park with the Lorenz teleprinter device used by the German High Command).[2] The telephone company Ericsson manufactured a number of T52 analogue machines[3] that could decode the messages once the key settings had been found by hand. The Swedes then read traffic in the system for three years, not only between Berlin and Oslo, but also between Germany and the German forces in Finland, and of course the German embassy in Stockholm. In total, the Swedes intercepted 500,000 German messages and decrypted 350,000.[3] However, poor security meant the Germans eventually became aware of this. An improvement in T52 security in 1942 was defeated by the Swedes. However, a second upgrade in mid-1943 was not, and the flow of decrypted messages came to an end.[3]
The British first detected T52 traffic in the summer and autumn of 1942 on a link between Sicily and Libya, codenamed "Sturgeon", and another from the Aegean to Sicily, codenamed "Mackerel". Operators of both links were in the habit of enciphering several messages with the same machine settings, producing large numbers of depths. These depths were analysed by Michael Crum.[4]
The British at Bletchley Park later also broke into Sturgeon, although they did not break it as regularly as they broke Enigma or Tunny. This was partly because the T52 was by far the most complex cipher of the three, but also because the Luftwaffe very often retransmitted Sturgeon messages using easier-to-attack (or already broken) ciphers, making it unnecessary to attack Sturgeon.
See also[edit]
SIGABA (United States)
Typex (Britain)
Siemens
References[edit]
Citations[edit]
^ Beckman B. Codebreakers: Arne Beurling and the Swedish crypto program during World War II. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society; 2002 Jan.
^ Rijmenants, Dirk (2008), Focus: Siemens & Halske T-52, retrieved 18 November 2014
^ Jump up to: a b c 
 Gannon, Paul (2006). Colossus: Bletchley Park's Greatest Secret. Atlantic Books. pp. 157–158. ISBN 1-84354-330-3.
^ The SAVILLE cryptographic algorithm; see note concerning Crum's career
Sources[edit]
Donald W. Davies, The Siemens and Halske T52e Cipher Machine (reprinted in Cryptology: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow, Artech House, Norwood, 1987)
Donald W. Davies, The Early Models of the Siemens and Halske T52 Cipher Machine (also reprinted in Cryptology: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow)
Donald W. Davies, New Information on the History of the Siemens and Halske T52 Cipher Machines (reprinted in Selections from Cryptologia: History, People, and Technology, Artech House, Norwood, 1998)
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Siemens T-52 cipher machines.
John Savard's page on the Geheimfernschreiber
Photographs of Sturgeon
Entry for "Sturgeon" in the Government Code and Cypher School Cryptographic Dictionary
Bletchley Park's Sturgeon, the Fish that Laid No Eggs at The Rutherford Journal.
v
t
eCipher machines
Rotor machines
CCM
Enigma
M-125 Fialka
Hebern
HX-63
KL-7
Lacida
M-325
Mercury
NEMA
OMI
RED
SG-39
SG-41
SIGABA
SIGCUM
Singlet
Typex
Mechanical
Bazeries cylinder
C-36
C-52
CD-57
Cipher disk
HC-9
Kryha
Jefferson disk
M-94
M-209
Reihenschieber
Scytale
Teleprinter
5-UCO
BID 770
DUDEK
KW-26
KW-37
Lorenz SZ 40/42
Siemens and Halske T52
SIGTOT
Secure voice
BID 150
FASCINATOR
KY-3
KY-58
KY-68
NESTOR
OMNI
SCIP
Sectéra Secure Module
SIGSALY
STE
STU-II
STU-III
VINSON
Other
JADE
KG-84
KL-43
KL-51
Noreen
Red
Purple
Pinwheel
Rockex
Computer hardware
AES instruction set
Intel SHA extensions
IBM 4758
IBM 4764
show
v
t
eCryptography
General
History of cryptography
Outline of cryptography
Classical cipher
Cryptographic protocol
Authentication protocol
Cryptographic primitive
Cryptanalysis
Cryptocurrency
Cryptosystem
Cryptographic nonce
Cryptovirology
Hash function
Cryptographic hash function
Key derivation function
Secure Hash Algorithms
Digital signature
Kleptography
Key (cryptography)
Key exchange
Key generator
Key schedule
Key stretching
Keygen
Machines
Ransomware
Random number generation
Cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator (CSPRNG)
Pseudorandom noise (PRN)
Secure channel
Insecure channel
Subliminal channel
Encryption
Decryption
End-to-end encryption
Harvest now, decrypt later
Information-theoretic security
Plaintext
Codetext
Ciphertext
Shared secret
Trapdoor function
Trusted timestamping
Key-based routing
Onion routing
Garlic routing
Kademlia
Mix network
Mathematics
Cryptographic hash function
Block cipher
Stream cipher
Symmetric-key algorithm
Authenticated encryption
Public-key cryptography
Quantum key distribution
Quantum cryptography
Post-quantum cryptography
Message authentication code
Random numbers
Steganography
 Category
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Siemens_and_Halske_T52&oldid=1304298539"
 Categories: 
Encryption devices
World War II military equipment of Germany
Cryptographic hardware
Signals intelligence of World War IIHidden categories: 
Articles with short description
Short description matches Wikidata
Commons category link is on Wikidata
 This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 05:17 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Legal & safety contacts
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view
Edit preview settings
Search
 Search
Toggle the table of contents
 Siemens and Halske T52
7 languages
Add topic
