                                 THE SIEMENS AND HALSKE T52e CIPHER MACHINE

  A series of cipher machines designated T52 was manufactured by Siemens and
  Halske between 1934 and 1944. They were built around the T36 teleprinter,
  to which were added encipherment and decipherment mechanisms. The machine
  could be used like a teleprinter, enciphering its output to the telegraph
  line and, when it was receiving from the telegraph line, deciphering the
  message before printing it. So the T52 machines operated ?on-line1 and
  when two machines were connected by a telegraph line (or equivalent
  communications path) they could be used like standard teleprinters, sending
 messages in cipher from one to the other. As with teleprinters, only one
  direction of transmission could be used at a time but the operator did not
 have to switch from send to receive, or from encipher to decipher. The
 use of the keyboard established the sending and enciphering mode.

 The T36 teleprinter dates from about 1928. A patent for a fsecret telegraph
 system' based on modifying the T36 was filed in Germany on 17 July 1930 by
 Jipp, Rossberg and Hettler, and assigned to Siemens and Halske. This became
 US patent 1,912,983 dated 6 June, 1933- The basic principles of the T52
 machines can be found in this patent.

 The design of the T52 machines was continually improved, particularly under
 the stimulus of the 1939-45 war. Models a, b, c, d, e and f have been
 repprted. It is said that a model known as a/b was in use at the beginning
 of the war and that model T52f was never put into production because the
 factory was bombed in October 1944.

This report is based on a close examination of two machines, one in Munich
at the Werner von Siemens Institute for the History of the House-of Siemens and
the other in the Science Museum, London. Both machines came from Norway and
were probably part of a group of machines in use in Oslo at the end of the
war. The assistance of the Siemens Institute and the Science Museum is
gratefully acknowledged and so is the help of the Norwegian Technical Museum
in Oslo.

Both machines examined are models T52e. They have a three-position control
switch which enables them to be set for operation as model e, in clear or as
d machines. In this sense, they could be called models d/e. Somewhat
          -2

surprising, the Science Museu* machine has a label giving it as T52c It
differs fro. the Munich machine in a few respects which will be detailed at
the end of the report. It sees to have been modified from an earlier model
and has vestiges of earlier mechanisms which will be described later.

te Science Museum machine has serial number 43996 and the Munich machine
serial number 67323*

There are believed to be similar machines elsewhere in Vest Germany, at
the Norwegian Technical Museum in Oslo and at Crypto AG in Zug, Switzerland.

PHYSICAL  L AY O U T  ,,.-..

Figure 1 shows the plan view of the machine. It contains 6 sub-units
which are attached to a heavy base.

The base contains, at its back, sockets for the tape-reader and punch and
large resistors for the motor AG supplies. ' At the front it has two control
knobs operating large multi-contact switches. 0»e of these connects th,.
input of the machine either to the tape-reader or the keyboard. The other
switch sets the machine in one of the three conditions T52d, clear or T52e.

The various sub-units except the keyboard connect electrically to the base
through jackpoints. Within the base is a mass of wiring connecting the
jackooints and also the control switches mentioned above and a set of
capacitors. The six sub-units will next be described, followed by a
description of the function as a whole.

Wherever possible in this report the names used for the parts are those
originally used or have been taken from documentation of the T36 machine
Where the correct name is not known our invented name will be marked » the
 report by the symbol (*)·

 1 The T36 Teleprinter Mechanism
 The centre of the machine contains the T36 mechanism on its ow. base, which
 can be detached by removing two bolts. This mechanism has a.drive motor
 with a speed regulator, driving 3 camshafts through a gearbox. «e have
                                                         -3-

called these the transmit, receive and translate/print camshafts respectively.
Each camshaft rotates when a clutch is released by a magnet (AMs, AMe, AMU)
shown in the diagram. The translate/print camshaft has, attached to its
front end, a type wheel containing raised letters and figures. A magnet
DM hits the paper tape against the inked type wheel, on-the-fly. Details
of the printing mechanism and its circuit are given later.

2. Keyboard
The keyboard fits into the base and, unlike the other sub-units, is connected
by wires to terminal points, not by jacks. It operates five changeover
contacts S1-S5 and a trip contact. Its mechanism is linked by a lever and
a wire linkage to a cam on the transmit camshaft. Details will be given
later.

Together, the T36 mechanism and the keyboard, with relays R1-R5, AR and KLR
are the standard mechanism of the T36 teleprinter. The remainder of the
units to be described are special to the T52e. The relays U and RR3 {*)
are not found in the T36 teleprinter and are part of the T52.

3. Coding Wheels and Cams
At the back of the machine is a large frame containing, at the top, ten
independently moving wheels which are stepped on by pawl mechanisms. Each
wheel has a different number of steps for a complete rotation. For wheels
W1-W10 (*) the number of steps is 47, 53, 59, 61, 64, 65, 67, 69, 71 and 73
r e s p e c t i v e l y.

Each wheel has a cam which operates two sets of changeover contacts shown in
Figure 2 which we have called A and B (*). The cam profiles generate a pseudo
random binaiy sequence. The positions of the wheels can be set by operating
the large lever shown at the front of the machine. Wheel positions can be
read from numbers as shown at the right of Figure 2 where the indicator, the
thumb wheel used for setting, the ratchet wheel and the cam are shown. Note
that there would be room for additional cam wheels to the right of the existing
 one.

As shown in Figure 2, the contact sets A and B are spaced about 1/3 revolution
 apart on the cam. Reading from contact sets A, Figure 3 shows the pseudo
 random cam - sequences as taken from the Munich machine. In the figures
                                                           -4-

 which follow, contacts A and B are shown in their unoperated or zero position,
 ie the low condition of the cam surface.

 The separation between the A and B contacts is indicated in Figure 3.
 When the wheels are set at position 1, the A contacts read state 1 of this
 figure and the B contacts read the state at the black square. The spacing
 between A and B contacts is given. Note that the output sequence at
 contacts B is delayed by approximately 1/3 revolution compared with that at
 contact A.

 In the Science Museum model, the pattern of coding on the cams is the same,
 but the wheel numbering does not agree. Details are given later*

 Figure 2 shows the interposer mechanism operated by a magnet M (*) which
 can inhibit the motion of a cam. Normally, all the pawl carriers PC (*)
 are dropped by the rotation of the drive shaft DS (*) allowing the pawls to
 fall and then positively rotate the coding wheels when they return. When M
 is operated an interposer prevents the pawl carrier from dropping and the
 wheel does not rotate. Each wheel has such a magnet. For setting the
 wheels, the unlocking shaft US (*) rotates anti-clockwise lifting the pawl
from the ratchet wheel. A sprung roller pressing on this wheel locates and
holds the wheel during setting. In the Munich machine, but not the Science
Museum machine, there is an additional pawl preventing counter-rotation.
This makes the mechanism more reliable but allows the wheels to be manually
set only in the forward direction, which is inconvenient.

The movement of the pawl carriers by shaft DS is derived from a cam driven by
a motor through a one-cycle clutch which is released by magnet AMC (*). There
are other cams on this shaft which operate contacts, to be described in detail
later.

The frame containing the motor, drive mechanism and coding wheels can be
tilted backwards against stops when two bolts are removed from the front
feet, the link to the unlocking lever is lifted off and a safety latch on
the left of the machine is released. This gives access to the rear of the
T36 mechanism. By removing a clip and a shaft, the coding wheel mechanism
could be detached for maintenance or replacement.
                                                       -5-

 4. The Relay and Key-setting Box
 On the right of the machine there is a black box with a lockable lid containing
 20 relays and 10 rotary switches, shown on Figure 1.

 The switches are used to set the fbasic key1 of the machine. The 10 switches
 are labelled ABCDEFGHJ and K. They correspond in reverse sequence
 to the wheels W10 to W1 respectively. Each switch has 10 positions which
 are labelled 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 followed by the Roman numberals I, II, III, IV, V.
The reason for this notation will be conjectured later.

The jackpoints of this relay and key setting box, which can be removed by
 detaching two bolts, are included in our circuit diagrams using a notation,
which is our own, shown in Figure 21.

5. KTF Unit
At the front left of the machine is a small box containing a switch with 10
 changeover contacts KT1-KT10. It can be removed by releasing four bolts.
The switch is labelled fwith» and 'without1 KTF. The meaning of fKTFf is
unknown but its function will be described later. Only contacts KT1, KT3,
KT5 and KT7 of the switch are in use but the others have been used at one
time then disconnected. The precise way in which the KTF switch is included
in the machine's circuits was probably changed from time to time as an
additional security feature. This is the reason why all the connections via
the KTF jack are shown in the circuit diagram of Figure 10, where the KTF
contacts appear.

6. Power Supplies
The machine appears to require three D.C. power supplies as well as 220V A.C.
Two of the D.C. supplies come from outside the machine and one is internal.
This internal supply was measured as 150 volts in the Munich machine and 120
volts in the Science Museum machine. It provides the source of power for
the 20 relays in the black box.

THE CONNECTING PLUC, EXTERNAL SUPPLIES AND CIRCUIT NOTATION
From the back of the base of the machine a flexible cable is joined to a 13 pin
plug. We believe that, in operation, this was attached to a line-connection
unit to which were attached power units and the telegraph line. This line-
                                                       -6-

connection unit contains additonal relays U, ER,V, D and Th for which we have
obtained the circuit from the documentation of the T36 teleprinter.

In our circuit diagrams the notation P1-P13 (*) is used for the points of
this connection plug. The function of the 13 connections is shown in Figure
20 together with our notation for other components shown in our circuit
diagrams. We also show here our notation for the internal power supply and
the two external power supplies which enter through this plug.

All connections to this plug except the earth wire go through filters located
in the base of the machine at the right side. The two AC connections have
the standard filter and one extra filter each. The DC resistance of each
filter is about 12 ohms.

The notation +N and -N comes from the documentation of the T36 teleprinter.
The notation for the other power supplies is our own. The cam contacts on
the pawl drive shaft have been denoted by Greek letters since we do not know
the original notation. The other nomenclature of Figure 20 is authentic.

LOGICAL PLAN OF THE MACHINE
Figure 4 shows, in schematic form, the plan of operation of the machine.

Encipherment and decipherment take place in the contacts of relays SR1-SR10.
The keyboard contacts (or tape-reader contacts if this is switched in)
generate five signals which after encipherment are sampled by cam contacts
F2-F6 on the transmit camshaft. When transmitting, the relay U (which is
in the line-connection unit) is operated so that the telegraph signal leaves
on 'line a1. At the same time the signal operates the polarised relay ER
which generates the copy of the telegraph signal which enters the 'receive1
section of the T52 machine. Here, it is sampled by the receive cam contacts
F10-F14 and, passing through the 'decipher1 contacts of SR1-SR10, the five
samples operate the relays R1-R5 which then store the plaintext character.
The outputs of these relays operate the translate and print unit.

When receiving, the U relay is released, the ER relay operates from 'line a'
and a repeated signal enters the receive cams. During transmission, the
 transmitted ciphertext is received and deciphered to generate the local printout.
                                                               -7-

Printing locally from a deciphered character checks the correct operation
of the contacts of relays SR1-SR10 but does not verify that the correct SR
relays are operated.

Details of the encipherment and decipherment method will be given later. The
remainder of the system is concerned with generating pseudo-random binary
sequences for the 10 channels SR1-SR10.

The sources of the pseudo-randomness are the B contact outputs of the 10
coding wheels W1-W10 shown in the figure. The movement of these coding wheels
is controlled by the interposer magnets M1-M10 which are operated by logical
functions of the outputs from coding wheel contacts A1-A10. This feedback
mechanism generates a long sequence of pseudo-random data from the wheels.
Part of the logic of the interposer magnets is provided by the KTF circuits
using a relay contact RR3 derived from the third telegraph element of the
plaintext as stored on relay R3- Thus, when KTF is switched on, the motion
of the coding wheels depends on an earlier plaintext character. In such an
operation, errors on the line will affect the wheel motion at the receiver and
put the two machines out of synchronism. For this "reason, if the line is bad,
KTF can be switched off. Without KTF, the synchronism of wheel positions
at sender and receiver is dependent on having the same initial setting and
then stepping both sets of wheels whenever any character is sent.

The B contacts from the coding wheels (at a different place on their
circumference) provide the signals which, after transformation, operate the
relays SR1-SR10. The B outputs are first transposed by the key-setting
switches according to the setting of the basic key. The transposed channels
are called X1-X10 (*). The H relays are logical functions of these channels,
and the SR relays are logical functions of the H relays, when the machine is
operating as a T52e. In the clear position, the relays SR are set so that
the characters are not transformed. In the T52d setting, the SR1-SR10
relays are operated directly by the channels X1-X10.

Figure 4 also shows the relative timing of the camshaft movements. When
transmitting, the receive camshaft operates very soon after the transmit
camshaft. (When the machine is receiving, the transmit camshaft does not turn

                                                                                                                                                                  \
                                                 -8-

 at all). Near the start of the motion of the receive camshaft, cam F37
 operates the magnet (AMC) which releases the coding wheel pawl mechanism.
 Near the end of the receive camshaft motion, cam F20 operates the magnet
 AMu which releases the translate/print camshaft. At the end of these cycles,
 the motion of the camshafts can be repeated almost at once. Experimentally
 it was found that about 6 characters could be sent per second. The relays
 R1-R5 hold the character to be printed during the delayed motion of the print
 camshaft. The timing will be shown in more detail later.

 To summarise, the 10 coding wheels control their own motion by feedback from
 contacts A through the logic of the interposer magnets. From their contacts
 B, they produce signals which, after transposition by the key-setting switches
 and logical operations due to the H relays, generate the 10 pseudo-random
 binary sequences of the SR relays which carry out the encipherment and decipherment
 functions. Receiving a character involves the receive camshaft and decipher
 logic, the relays R1-R5 and the translate and print logic. When a character
 is transmitted, it is at the same time received, deciphered and printed in
 clear form.

ENCIFHER-TRANSMIT CIRCUIT
Figure 5 shows the circuit used to transmit an enciphered character. The
plaintext character is generated by the keyboard contacts S1-S5 or by the
tape-reader if this is used. The circuits involving the tape-reader are not
shown. With the voltages shown on the contacts cf S1-S5, if they were
connected directly through to the contacts F2-F6 they would generate the 5
information-carrying elements of the telegraph signal on the transmit circuit,
which leaves the machine on pin P9 of the connection plug.

In the rest state, relay AR is off and a positive signal appears on the transmit
circuit. The telegraph signals are derived from a power supply T (*) through
current limiters. When any key is depressed, relay AR operates and places
the negative or 'start' element on the transmit line through contact F1. At
the same time, current goes to the release magnet AMs, starting the transmit
cycle, the timing of which is shown in Figure 6. Relay AR is soon released
so that at the end of the cycle cam F1 again transmits the stop signal of
positive polarity.
    Encipherment is carried out by the changeover contacts shown in our diagram
    in the rectangular boxes associated with each of the 10 relays SR1-SR10.
    The contents of one box are shown and the particular contacts used can be
    identified in the plan of the SR relays shown in Figure 7. Each box either
   transposes two lines or connects them straight through. In the non-enciphering
   or 'clear' condition, SR6-SR10 are released but SR1-SR5 are operated and for
   this reason the connection points of the latter relays are located differently
   in our diagram so that the 'clear' connection is straight through.

   The operation of individual relays of the set SR6-SR10 reverses the positive
. and negative connections to the corresponding send contacts S1-S5. This

   effect can be expressed as a modulo 2 addition (or exclusive or) of the 5
  encipherment channels with the 5 elements of the telegraph code. This is a
  typical Vernam cipher operation.

  The relays SR1-SR5 carry out transpositions of the 5 telegraph elements. The
  32 different settings of these five channels produce 32 different transpositions
  out of the 120 possible.

  The combination of Vernam addition with transposition of the signal elements
  is the principle described in the early patent of Jipp and others. However,
 in that patent there were 10 binary channels generating transpositions. (This
 was unnecessary, since 8 channels can easily be made to generate the complete
 set of 120 transpositions.) In the T52e machine, with 5 transposition channels,
 the full set of transpositions is not employed.

 Figure 6 gives details of the contact timing of the transmit camshaft. A
 cam on this shaft restores the trip contact and locks the keyboard during the
 motion of the camshaft. The contacts S1-S5 are allowed to move to their correct
 positions only when the keyboard has been locked and just in time for the sending
 of the 5 information-bearing elements by cam contacts F2-F6.

RECEIVE-DECIPHER CIRCUIT
In Figure 7, the received signals pass from right to left so that the SR
contacts can be shown in the same relative positions as in Figure 5.
                                                           - 10 -

 The first negative-going signal on the receive line from P13 operates the
 receive released magnet AMe through F9 and the camshaft then turns. The
 five information-bearing elements of the signal are sampled by the short
 operations of cam contacts F10-F14 of which the timing is shown in Figure 8.
 These signals are stored as charges on the 5 capacitors shown. The capacitors
 are in the base of the machine, towards the back.

Near the end of the cycle, 5 simultaneously closing contacts F15-F19 connect
 the stored charges on the capacitors through the decipherment circuit to the
 polarised relays R1-R5 shown on the left of the figure. These are bistable
 relays which hold the value of the received character until the next one is
 received. The circuits of the relays SR1-SR10 used in this decipher circuit,
being identical to the encipher circuit, ensure that a true plaintext character
is stored on the polarised relays. The current pulse to set these relays
lasts 2-3 ms only.

The timing diagram for the receive camshaft is shown in Figure 8. It includes
cam contact F37 which releases the pawl drive mechanism and cam contact F20
which releases the translate/print camshaft, almost one cycle later than the
receive camshaft.

Figure 9 shows, for each of the 32 possible settings of the SR1-SR5 relays
the way in which the plaintext signal elements 1-5 are transposed to produce
the ciphertext elements. Note that the final entry, in which all the relays
SR1-SR5 are operated, does not transpose the elements. This is the condition
obtained by setting the main control switch to the clear position.

LOGIC OF THE INTERPOSER MAGNETS
Figure 10 shows the circuits of the interposer magnets M1-M10. These magnets
are operated by relay logic from the cam contacts A1-A10 together with the KTF
switch. Contacts KT1, KT3, KT5 and KT7 belong to the KTF switch and are
shown in the circuit in the 'without KTF' position. The circuit also shows
the jack points of the KTF unit which we have given the designation E (*).

With KTF off, the magnet operation is dependent only on the contacts A1-A10
and the effective circuit is shown at the top of Figure 11. Also included
in the actual circuit of Figure 10 is a cam $ (*) which is on the pawl drive
                                                         11

 camshaft and releases when the coding wheels are being moved, to protect their
 A contacts from arcing. There is also a switch contact which releases these
 circuits when the machine is set for operation in clear. The pawl-drive
 motor is also switched off in the 'clear' condition. The supply for
 the M magnets is the +N, -N supply, provided externally.

The timing of the operation of the pawl carriers and of cam 8 is shown in
Figure 16. All the interposer magnets have their current removed from 90°
 onwards, but the interposers are effective earlier, when the pawl carriers
begin to drop, at about 30-40° · When the current to the M magnets is
 removed, the force exerted by the pawl carrier extensions on the operative
interposers prevents them from detaching and letting the pawl carriers drop.

With the KTF switch on, the operation of magnets M1, M8, M9 and M10 is
dependent on element 3 of the coded plaintext character which was last
received. This is the character stored on relays R1-R5 from the previous
cycle. If there has been a long pause, the character will have been printed
but the setting of the relays R1-R5 is not changed until late in the receive
cycle so the old setting is effective in the interposer logic circuit. With
KTF a plaintext character has no effect on encipherment in the cycle in which
it has been sent. In the next cycle it can alter the wheel movements at both
sender and receiver. The effect on encipherment and decipherment takes place
for the next character, 2 characters later than the one causing the change.

The contact RR3 belongs to an extra relay, the circuit of which can be seen
in Figure 21, which slaves the R3 relay. A second contact on RR3 functions
in place of the R3 contact in the circuit for translating and printing the
stored character.

We remarked earlier that the wiring of the KTF switch had been altered. All
10 contacts have been in use at some time. Some may have been used in the
negative supply circuits of M1, M7, M8, M9 and M10 where there are now fTXed
connections in the KTF box.

Figure 11(a) gives an example of the wheel motion produced-by the action of the
interposers. In this example, KTF is off and the starting position has all
                                                            - 12 -

 the wheels set at '1'. The M magnet operations are shown, and the consequent
 output from the A contacts. In all, 25 successive states of the wheels and
 24 operations of the pawl-drive mechanism are shown. When an M magnet is
 operated, the corresponding wheel does not move and, in the next state, the
A contact holds its previous position. These wheel positions which are
 identical with the previous positions are shown by broken lines in the figure.
This sequence was verified by experiment on both machines examined, though the
numbering difference meant that the Science Museum machine did not start at
all ones.

The logic of the M magnets can be verified. For example, M4 operates whenever
A2 and A3 are operated, as in phases 1, 7, 8, 9, 10 etc. in the figure. At the
right of the figure, the final positions of the wheels in the Munich machine
after the 24 operations are listed.

Because of this feedback from the A contacts to the interposer magnets, the
motion of the cams is complex and will not repeat for a very long time. A
choice of relatively prime numbers for the numbers of steps in the coding
wheels is not significant when a complex sequence of movements like this is
employed. This 'relatively prime' feature is perhaps left over from an
early version in which the stopping of the coding wheel movements by an
interposer was not employed.

CIRCUITS OF RELAYS H AND SR
The circuits of these relays are shown in Figures 12 and 13· The logical
effect of these circuits is shown in Figures 14 and 15 and the timing of the
cams on the pawl drive mechanism which control these operations is shown in
Figure 16.

The incoming signals are derived from the B contacts, operated by the coding
wheels. In the on state, the outputs from these contacts are from the V+
supply, interrupted by the contact y to disconnect the B contacts when the
wheels are in motion. In the off state, these contacts connect to the V-
voltage (when the machine is operating as T52e). These positive or negative
signals are applied to the wipers of the key-setting switches, designated
ABCDEFGHJ and K as shown.
                                                           - 13 -

The outputs of the key-setting switches are connected by 10 busbars from the
contacts of all the switches. The switches are set to act as a transposition
of the 10 channels.

If the setting of the switches is not a permutation, two of the inputs will
be connected together by joining to a common busbar and, with appropriate
setting of the B contacts, this will connect the Vf to the V- supply. The
power supply has been designed to withstand this short circuit, with some

                                                                                   tt

overheating, but the relay U then releases and prevents the teleprinter
operating from its keyboard. To avoid such short circuits causing arcing
at the key-setting contacts, the lid of the box containing these switches has
a lid contact which breaks the negative supply. For test purposes, the lid
contact can be depressed and locked but the switches should never be operated
in this condition or arcing on their contacts may damage them. The outputs
of the key-setting switches consists of the 10 circuits which we have called
X1-X10, which correspond to the switch settings 1, 3, 5i 7, 9i I., II, HI, IV,
V respectively.

In the T52e operation of the machine, each H relay is connected between two of
the X circuits. Since the relay can be operated by a current in either
direction, it becomes a modulo 2 sum (exclusive or function) of the two X
outputs. The logical expressions thus generated are shown on the left side
of Figure 14, for example the first row indicates that H1 = X1 + X2, with
modulo 2 addition.

Figure 12 also shows that the X circuits are connected through to the SR relays
directly when the machine is operating as T52d. In this case, the H relays
do not operate. In the 'clear' condition the relays SR1-SR5 are operated
directly and the SR6-10 relays released.

Figure 13 shows that the operation of each SR relay is a modulo 2 sum (exclusive
or function) of two of the H relays. These logical relationships are summarised
in the right hand side of Figure 14, for example SR1 = H1 + H8, with modulo 2
addition.

Cam contact <x* on the pawl drive camshaft breaks during the wheel movement,
                                                            - 14 -

    leaving the SR relays held through their make contacts and cam B . Thus
    the movement of the wheels during the pawl-drive cycle and the release of
    the H relays when contact y breaks does not affect the state of the SR relays
    until late in the cycle when cam p releases and cam .04 remakes.

    The 9 cam contacts /X in the hold circuits and the 9 cam contacts X in
    the make circuits are provided to avoid 'sneak circuits' through the H
   contacts or the hold contacts when the main cams are released.

   Combining together the logic of the H coils and the H contacts, the state
   of each SR relay can be seen to be the modulo 2 sum of 4 of the X channels.
   These functions are summarised in Figure 15. The functions are such that
   the modulo 2 sum of all the SR relays is zero, as we would expect, but we
   find a further linear relationship between the SR relays and a consequent
  third relationship. These linear relationships are shown on the right hand
  side of Figure 15.

  The logical relations which make each SR relay depend on four X outputs are
  a new feature in the T52e, not present in the T52d. The purpose of the
  relations is easily deduced. Even though the coding cam sequences are
 reasonably random, the outputs on contacts B are not, because the stopping'of
 the wheels makes it more likely that 0 will be followed by 0 than by 1. Such
 strong statistical properties in the sequences controlling Vernam addition
 and element transposition are a weakness in the cipher. It is easily seen
 that the modulo 2 sum of four of those channels has a much better statistical
 distribution. Evidently the H and SR relays and the logical relations
 summarised in Figure 15, which were first introduced in the T52e model,
 increased the strength of the cipher.

Figure 16 shows the timing of the cam contacts on the pawl-drive mechanism
and the period when wheel movement takes place. The location of the cam
contacts is also shown in this figure.

It is important that the SR relays should not alter their positions before 330*
on the transmit camshaft. At this time, the transmit camshaft has completed
the sending of its 5th information-bearing element by cam F6. The pawl-drive
camshaft is delayed until 5* when its magnet receives current and then, we
                                                           - 15 -

estimate, until 35° by magnet operation. (The AMs magnet must take 10 mS
to operate, if the start pulse is to be of correct length. . The AMC magnet
can be assumed at least to take the same time.) This places the break of
hold contacts fi and ajl at 285° + 35° = 320° . Therefore the release of
the SR relays must not be faster than 3*3 nfi, which is reasonable, but the
margins are close.

It is possible that contact & is out of adjustment, since it does not overlap
contact c6. In slow operation of the camshaft, all the SR relays release.
The 'on' period of cam A could be lengthened at both ends by an adjustment.
Figure 16 shows the measured values on the Science Museum machine. The
timings of Figures 6 and 8, except for cam F37, come from T36 teleprinter
documentation.

TRANSLATE AND PRINT CIRCUITS
The circuit used for translating and printing is, with one small change, the
same as for the T36 teleprinter. The circuit is shown in Figure 17 and its
operation depends on the timing of the translation cams shown in Figure 18.

The purpose of this circuit is to operate the printer magnet IM at the correct
instant, depending on the state of the relays R1-R5. In the T52e circuit,
a contact of the slave relay RR3 takes the place of R3 in this translate
circuit.

When the position of the R contacts and the state of the F cam contacts
coincides, a circuit is produced from the negative supply at P11 through to
the print magnet. The print current is provided by the charge stored in the
capacitor C10, which is re-charged through the cam F27 at the end of the
cycle. Parallel circuits are provided for the letters/figures shift magnets
Bu and Zi and the bell relay KLR. The magnet VUM also operates in these cases
to stop the paper feed. The cam F39 is fitted but the 'who are you' unit is
absent.

CONTROL OF THE RELEASE MAGNETS
Figure 19 summarises the control of the release magnets and shows the circuit
of AR and other relays in.the external unit.
                                                     - 16 -

The keyboard trip contact is operated by depressing any key that is active and,
if the short-circuit detection relay U is operated, AR and the external relay U
will operate. When AR is operated, the transmit release magnet is operated
and, through the transmit circuit, ER and the receive circuit, the receive
release magnet is operated soon afterwards. The operation of the receive
camshaft releases the pawl-drive by F37 and magnet AMC and the translate

                                                                           ri

print shaft by F20 and magnet AMu.

The need for the relay ER, which reproduces the telegraph signal for the
receive circuits, can now be understood. In the receive-decipher circuits
of Figure 7 this signal charges the five capacitors which store the character
for printing. It also operates the release magnet AMe. These impose loads
on the signal which would distort it if the signal from the line was used
directly. In particular, the capacitors demand large initial currents,
limited only by the resistors which generate the Ov signal of the N supply,
see Figure 20. This distortion would affect incoming signals from the line
and outgoing signals, which are also received for local printing. The ER
relay ensures that the signal entering the receive circuit always comes from
a local, low impedance source, the N supply.

At the same time that ER first operates, during the start element of a transmitted
or received character, relay D in the external unit operates and holds. Relay
V also operates and shortly afterwards the thermal relay operates. When N
has ceased to operate for a sufficient time, the thermal relay will release
and thus release relay V. This circuit activates the motors on the first
occasion that a character is received and keeps them running for a short while
after characters have ceased to arrive.

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE TWO T52 MACHINES
There are some minor differences between the Munich and Science Museum machines
 such as the absence of the reverse motion pawls in the Science Museum machine
 and a few differences in the electrical noise suppression arrangements.

Functionally there is one significant difference between these two machines.
 Although the patterns of the 10 coding cams are the same, they are differently
 placed relative to the cam numbering. Since the wheel settings are determined
                                                           - 17 -

  by the numbering of the cam wheels, these two machines could not be used to
   communicate with one another except by converting the initial wheel settings
  from one to the other.

  The differences in numbering are in each case close to one-third of a wheel
  revolution which suggests that they were produced by assembling the cam
  mechanism relative to the numbering wheel with the three connecting bolts
  going through different holes.

 To produce the equivalent of the Munich machine wheels set all to ones,
 the Science Museum machine wheels would have to be set to the values:-

                                            32, 18, 1, 21, 43, 44, 61, 23, 24, 49

 It is odd that wheel 7 numbering (underlined) is displaced by just one step
 when it could easily have been adjusted for coincidence.

 An important compatability feature for the coding wheels is the set of
 displacements between the A and B sets of contacts shown on Figure 3 by the
 black squares. These are identical in the Munich and Science Museum machines.

 The Science Museum machine has an unused gear wheel fixed to the right hand end
 of the shaft which holds the coding wheels. A flat on this shaft, engaging
 with a bolt prevents it moving. Small bronze cams with one notch in each cam
are fitted adjacent to the left side of each indicator wheel. When the fixing
bolt was removed, these cams were found to rotate with the unused gear wheel
though stiffly. It is therefore possible that they formed part of an earlier
mechanism in which the central shaft, instead of being fixed, rotated in the
three bearings provided. This would account for the oil holes in two of the
bearings which now have no purpose. In the third bearing the oil hole has
been replaced by the fixing bolt.

There is a set of radial slots on the inside of each indicator wheel in the
Science Museum machine but not the Munich one. Having one slot per step of
the wheel suggests that this is not just an accident of manufacture. It is
possible that the gear wheel, cams and slots were part of an earlier wheel
drive mechanism.
                                                             - 18 -

     DEVELOPMENT OF THE T52 SERIES OF MACHINES
     There are some clues to the way the T52 machine developed between 1934 and 1944
. but at present, insufficient information to give definite conclusions. We
     know about the T52d because the machines examined can work in this fashion.

    The 1930 patent described the basic encipherment principle, consisting of
    Vernam addition followed by transposition of elements. The circuits shown
    were based on the T36 teleprinter. The transposition scheme in the patent
    used 10 sets of contacts instead of the 5 sets (SR1-SR5) shown in Figures 5
    and 7. Using 10 sets, the patent shows two alternative transposer layouts.
    The method of obtaining the pseudo-random sequences for operating the 15 sets
    of contacts (5 Vernam and 10 transposer) is not clearly stated, but depends
    on cam wheels.

   The use of 5 transposing relays in the T52e machine can be traced back to
   the T52dI where relays SR1-SR5 are operated directly by outputs 1,3579
   of the key-setting switchboard (Figure 12). The strange notation 1, 3|' 5\ 7
   9, I, II, III, IV, V is then probably explained. Roman numbers were used'
   for the Vernam channels and the ten transposer channels were originally
  numbered 1-10, then the even-numbered transposer units were dropped at some
  stage. The two transposer layouts in the patent do not, unfortunately
  gave confirmation since they cannot be related to the T52d/e layout by deleting
  transposer units.

 In Cryptologia, Volume 3, No. 4, October 1979, page 210 a photograph taken by
 David Kahn shows a T52 machine as displayed in Bonn at the conference on World
 War II cryptology, in November 1978. It is not known which of the models a-d
 thxs was. This machine has no internal power supply and no H and SR relays
 The KTF switch is there, in a different place. The key-setting rotary
 swatches wer* absent and in their place, under a locked black cover, was a
 set of plugs, inserted into a set of sockets. The plugs and sockets can be
seen an a photograph provided by Dr E HUttenhain, showing a machine of the same
type as the 'Bonn' machine though not an identical one. The front two plugs
are seen to be labelled E and K in this photograph.

A striking feature of this early T52 model is the presence of two sets of 'B'
contacts and four cams. We can guess at the presence of two sets of 'A'
                                                             - 19 -

  contacts, probably running on cams 2 and 4 (counting from the ratchet side).
  Mounting slots for such extra contacts are present in the T52e.

  The Bonn machine photograph seems to show cams 1 and 3 with the same pattern,
  and cams 2 and 4 also identical, but it is difficult to be sure.

 In the absence of the SR relays, the coding wheel cams had to operate 4
 changeover contacts. How these were disposed on the 4 cams and how wheel
 movement was controlled cannot be deduced.

 Unfortunately, the information about the T52 from two prisoneers-of war,
 reproduced in the Cryptologia article is so full of errors -that it cannot
 be used to improve our knowledge of T52 development.

 ADJUSTMENT AND MAINTENANCE
 Most aspects of maintenance, such as the lubrication and adjustment of
 contacts, are obvious. Possibly the plastic cam surfaces should be lightly
 greased to reduce wear.

The T36 gearbox contains a helical gear and this needs lubrication, though very
little lubricant has been used on it. It can be inspected and greased by
removing the lid of the gearbox. The speed regulator rotor is first removed
by slackening one bolt. The brush assembly should be left attached to the lid,
because its fixing screws also retain the top bearing. One screw on the lid
covers an oil hole. When replacing the speed regulator rotor, the brushes
must be retracted. Only one or two drops of oil or a small direct application
of grease to the gears is necessary.

The speed regulators can be adjusted with a stroboscope. The white patches
provided for this purpose pass by at 250 per second on both regulators. To
adjust speed while the motors are running, hold still the larger knurled ring
then adjust the smaller ring. The speed is not altered by holding these parts
still. There is less ambiguity of measurement if the shaft speed is checked,
and this is 2500 rpra for the T36 motor and 1500 rpm for the pawl-drive motor.
The gear ratios from motors to clutches are 5 : 1 for the T36 mechanism and 3: 1
for the pawl-drive mechanism, so both camshafts operate at 500 rpm. One sixth
                                                                  - 20

    of a revolution is the time of one telegraph element, which is 20 mS.

· TEST CIRCUIT FOR OPERATION OF THE T52e MACHINE
    In the absence of the line-connecting unit, it is possible to test the operation
    of the T52e machine with one external power supply taking the place of the T and
    N supplies.. The connections to the plug we have called P are shown in Figure 22.

    The use of a 240V, 50 Hz, AC supply seems to be harmless because the spe.ed
   regulators can handle the small increase of voltage. The DC output of the
   rectifier across the reservoir capacitor should be approximately 120V but is
   not critical. The resistor in the supply to P12, simulating the coil resistance
   of relay U of the line-connecting unit, is essential to avoid a short-circuit
   of the supply.

   By connecting P9 to P13 and using a common supply in place of the T and N
   supplies, the need for relay ER is avoided. This would not be satisfactory
   for transmission.over a pair of lines but it enables local printing from the
  keyboard to operate correctly.

  The motors operate whenever the supply is connected, in the absence of the
  control relays in the line-connecting unit.

  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
  Dr Goetzeler of the Werner von Siemens Institute for the History of the
 House of Siemens in Munich provided the facilities for examining the T52e machine
  in their collection. Dr Schoen and Mr Bayer of that institute also gave useful
 help. Dr Pramm of the Norsk Technisk Museum in Oslo allowed the examination
 of their machine. Dr Strimpel of the Science Museum provided the opportunity
 to examine their machine at length, enabling much of the detail to be filled in.

 Prof. Randell of Newcastle University provided notes of a conversation with
 Mr Fricke on the manufacture of these machines and Dr HUttenhain of Bonn
 provided useful information about the T52 and. a photograph of an early model.
 The help of all these people is gratefully acknowledged.
       H - A ^ e - 6 Tc r ^ ^ e r f C a v ^ t o * - t ^ e - f r - A ^ j ^ t - c ^ ^ f ^ ^ - ff

                                                                                                                    &-70  £«·!**/
                                                                                                                   J<0
                    3o     RO        I**           210                                          270         3So
                    --i--
                                     L_            L_                                           l_             L.
                       10
                 30                                                                                         no

F2               30              10          l5"o
F3
F+         2S              So        iro
           Lo
F5"    10                                                                                                          ^-rAv^/NMi-j eU^G*\W 2.
F£
                    30                                     110                                         270
F7                                                                                              21c
                                                   x\o
Crt»n
                           keyboard Uckcil >1vip can Hurt restore.I                                                 330
                                                                                                            350
                           qo        --I--                                                       i
                                                                      2\Q                       370                  33*

                                                                                                                                          c\h L.0, |orfci'k*Yk-i-i''4tJt-h**

                                                                                                                      5+0

                                                                                                                   3i0
d) ®H

 6

ON     \" l

1, *vT ,» N tfL
                         " VA ^ v e                                               3 relaw RR3 coM-ac*
      L o ^ ' t c ^ j ^ j ^ k n o p + ^ < » Ts % e

                                                                                            Coding wheel
                                                                                             Co>\tY\Gr5

                                                                                            Al -AI0

                                           tea               ten              10
                                           in ter            Coding
                                    ry nostr                                      Coc*lf\g
                                                            W\ -WIO
                                                            a*4 drive.            wheel

 ms.  Jj] receive                                   tU-MlO                        0 Cont-a.cV-5  key
        P-20
F                                                                                 Bt-Bio
                        3 prCr»nl-
37
          ] aj<t<^\«, wh«| p*uls
                                                                                                 10 *-    -XI-XlO

                                                                                                   \re\a.ys:
                                                                                            10 H l - H I O - d /klar/e

                                                            SR.1-SR10 CoM'KeJCS

                  1  'CAMt                          F2-6                                             10   S<U-S*Uo
                                                                                                                        RR.3
      SI-S5-                                                                      Fio-14-        ^2
          \
                                                                                            detip^c.*"     rd A.y j            awa
                                                                                                                              pnnt"
                                                            -o l»w«.<\ T                                  £l-R5

                                                                   -O L.ir\e      £*»*r          fatot

                                                    /777
                                                 Z                                  £

    --Io                                         ·~4          4>                    t*

                            U>                        nt  T7

^0                                                            L. ~ J                        D

                                                                                            DS

«a                                                                                          1 DS

                                                                                                                          si

                                                                                                                          CL

SD                                                                                      -- I ^ DS ID

                                                                                                                          O

                                                                                        O*                                3

SD                                                                          ^                                             io '
                                                              0>
                        <P
                                                                                 O                                        in
5°
                                                                              o
                                                          ""1 H

                                                                                            O S )i

SD                                                                               (3

2D                                               -4                                                                   Do

                                                                        3

                                                                       <rs

                                                          4*

                                                                                                         D2

                                             _0
                            -j

    ->4
    to
I  '

                                                                                   H

                                                                                   5

                                                                                         ~P

                                                                                               C

                                                                                        K>

                                                                                   3
                                                                                   I

                                                                                   *I

                                                                                   X
                                                                                   n

                                 tzzt  CO

                                       rCL

"tKwr^b-VjKttl C                         blWVt Ui ^j yj (p >                                  "lnAiCA^or
                                                                                   ] KaJ-cVc* wheel
               Cc^r-i >jV,c*I C        H

                                                              II
                                           XA                 o

                                       Trr 3
                                                                               v^
                                      OlM ^%a                                                                                                              L*d

^?A>V4 ^0^^X7 9%-^") 'try -i»/w                               -- S» *·df*                                                                                  Ud

                                                                                                              - ^ M« w»2                                   ltd

                                                                                 _nJiT                                      4                                 i?d
                                                                                                                                                              nd
                                                                           Hh                                                                                4rd
                                                                                                                                                              )fd
 * ». .-J.                                                      --i
                                                                   3.1                                                                                         SCd
-1*                                                                        -1 H                            ^
                                                                                                                                                               ltd
 *^r+                                             -\ t-         I       1              H I-                   ^iA                                            Old
                                                                                                                                                              ted
       T                                          -^ )-                       -,s,--,  I»I1                   \    1     r                                    Ird

           3i                                     - * * . - l i * " H i . ^V            MX           J. i     T^o        *                                 31 ^Gy
                                                                                                    --»
                                                                                           I--

                                                  ^L                       I                    Th                 _v^X

                                                                      Hh

                                                         -I I-

hm T                                           w              V- : i                                                                                  *"3

                                                         l_.       u. · f ^ V * * ^ - ) » i ~ < J / ^ " V v i W - A j . J T m o J w ^ T ^ p T ^N1rVJ
r\^<c l£>                             Tc»A.iVs^ Of <Zas*S QA -fk«t pg»wl-- olin V e H t t U A K i / K                                    of co*.+Ackr

                                            <\o                   \So                                  no

                                      .. .        .

                              \T                                                 24 0

0 f- pc\wl                                                   1 ~~"V^
                                                             1         ^---1
Carrier*                                                     1 ^^-^ ,
                                                                                                                                           opca-rO^v* erf-
                                                             1              1
                                                                                                                                         CrrcuiV; of- Hl-HiO
                                            qo lof           |6C            iio
                                                                                                                                         ciVtuiVr *£ Mi- Mio
<*,        It                                                                                                              3io
                                                                                                       US                                pv-tfl-tcf r c©nf*thf A
               1                                                                                                                          OP ***«* l"C t*sMiv%olu«l
               1"*-- [* prme'iplG > ** ov*rUp iX n«e^<^
               1

                                  i.

           20                                                                                          250
                                              qo                                                                                    310

                                            10                                                             3io

           to                                                                                     Z9S                                            veWyX SR.l-S\7-lo
                                                                                                                                         3Co
                                      TM -'" T- " --" "" "   " ' l "             "'1
                                                         ^O                                   270
                                                                       1*0
     I/O

     7*

    J"-   to   CO        Go        CO     to                         J"

                   7° 7°                      *-*

                      i

                   X            XX            X                      ^

                   XX              X          XX             <JJ

                         XX        XX              X

                                                              <T

                                                                               (

          X                  XX        X           X         ->4

          XX             X      X                  X

          ...                                                VD      t

          XX X                            X        X

                             XXX X                 X                 s
                                                   -J

               X                       XXX         X
                                                   oo

          X        X         X            X        X

               X         X         1X         X    o--I

                                                         ?»       r-

                                                                  o

          XX                 X     X          Xf

                   XX           X      XX                         5

I'M       X XX X XX X X XX                                        o

CO

                                                         >
                                                         ^
                                                                  X
o                                                  I
                                                                  I

                                                                  7?
i f x              in        a:       3:

                        9"\      -r-

        X                                    X   X    --1>

                                          XX X        to       I

                                                                   c

                                      XX         X    ^1

                                 XX              X    ~vl          -f

                             XX                  X    <D       f-

            X           X                        X                 r

                                                            H      0

        X          X                             X    N        0   r»
                                                 -4
                                                               7   pN
                                                               v>  .)

               X        X-                       OO   N            ^

                                                 X                 ^

            XX                        .               K            >S
                                                                   T.
                                                                   O

               X             X                   X    H            3
                                                 0                 »o

<0                                                                 X

I

                                                                                                                                                                  \

        t o t o to l o           GO   to     CO                    X

v< JO.  2?     00            5 TO                                  1

        0                    ^1

               X                             X                     t/>

                                                                   75

                   X             X               X

                                                                                                                                                                     ),

                        X             X          X

        X                    X                   X

            X      X                             X

            X                             X      X

                        X                 X

                                      X      X   ~x~

                                                  00

        X      X                                 ~x~

                             XX                  "x~
i

),
                     *n ~~7r\iom          -0>^£--l---, I 2.0 vt>H-$  I U X v+ cam       l(e       ^^Hlv\<^  q^m,  H       * " <! » w j

                     Ltd ConXVtfir        XB3 V-                                                                                                     V4-

                                          4 ke         Sopply

                     A-                                                                                                                       IS 50 U_

                          *r                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                    V-
                                                                                                                                           reLau 0

"A                             A B3             1S f A                                            A               \,B1    A
                                                                                                                     Air
     AM                               A1        <>Ai*  6 An          4 All         Mi*            6AIW-                   4ak v-»-*v-
                                                                                                                  6
      K                            H                                                                                                       W l pe,r5

                                          key-SGtt"ino rotary swjtche.5

                                          ^            Y             m             i                                                       pcaoranltlaecletsd

                                                                                                                                           oil 12000 ji

                                                                                                                                                        e

                                                                                                                          i             «  TM  ~  f  :  R
                                                                                                                                                        d

                                                                                                                                           +er\Conr*t>$,

(srObiz                                                                                                                                    \n JGltinn^k
         EC
                     &lS(SRl)       Bm-(5R3) 8IS-(*R4) ei^SRS") AS(SMo) A3(S*8)                   Al(m> A+(sR<?) fl2(s«7)
              d ice                                            -W 41se ciVro'ifr of Sf^l -- SRIO
                                                                                                                  Setting V- SR/-SRS* on
Conr>e.ch««l »>
                                                                                                                                         S«-SMo off

                                                                                                                  Settir^ yd - XI-XlO connect
                                                                                                                                           toS^I-SR\0 c'lruiirj
                               C G I r ^ O V f w I C rfvt- t w»H»ooh KFF> stn."KV^ gg| cne;

        r\         5"          -JO   is"            T          ·       2£>       25

                       T                                                          i

M1                                                   nan

A1 i_ru                        r u t j -- u . ^ . . r--t- 20

M2      CZI               I1

A2   i                      ^n _ r L r - " t - L j                          UTL 22

M3                                   1=3 CZI                                en a

A3 1 ~l ^T"*                                                                --i-

                                                                                 L, 20

MA      CZI               i    i                    n             czi       nzi

AA                        u.         ,, j -- i _ r 16 4 - _ | ( . . ,,

M5                                                  CZI           CZI       CZI

             -I K                                       -l 1-

A5                                                                     'UU~~U 22

M6                  1=1                                                

A6   1       r~u.ji_n_r                                                 H_n_ 23

M7           n=3                     1 I C Z I E ZJ CZI CZJ

A7 1 _r~u                                -i--

                                              H-.-^ ^...J"1""" 15

M8      I          1                                D CZI a CZI CZI

A 8 1 Jl_... J                       _ T " ~ - U . * --                     H I - 16

M9   I       »                                                   a

A 9 1 _ < +                  J u_ __n_ru i_ 17

M10                :           i--i

A10                                  i n.                                   J 14
5, 3                                           3                               j
 L
               \fi                                                                                                            c

                                  ^

                                   t
                                                    1 _ 53>
                                                       ^  °  -t
                                                    I*

r1                  Vi * + I                                                   n

3

2 S-                                                ^

                    Tt> ^^r>-
                    ox

                               \  t< 7 ^ $     _

t3
         -4

J °0                              -JZo

 t                                   t. - o ; -- ;

                    ^ > :>                          v~ . _ ^ > - ,
                                                                           00
                               TO

                                     f

                                  t : | c r >

                    5" I                   o                 "n «

                    n ?                i

                                  ft
                                           P
                                                   i
                                                   i

                                               oo

                                        ?i* I

                                %^ r^ -- ^ \

                                ?-v_x
             o    ~  -      ?3»£ ) -

              1

             t ~" --

             f ** --            n. | 1

                     ·"·  ^ J " ' a » i -
             1 --TM ^^
      3"                              :-!?5
                  _,# "·"*  i·  j>?«1i  ^* 'i
5 rs         --·  _. *"
          »  N--                        I -i
'- o --o -- o -- o                    - o --o --o --o

   o -- -- o    ---- o O              ----o o ----o o              "Co"         Vi
                                      ------ -- o o o o
                                      oooo o oo o                               r,
                                      ooooo o oo
   -- -- ---- o o o o                                                         c

                                                                   c o 3|

o o oo o o oo                                                      To
                                                                   is*

M vj M *       M "1 M UJ              M "1 H -f-     N vi M --

CO la» uu L P  > 4> -f> ^             w vo i/>> 0 0  CV oo 0 J CO
4> ^ v j (A    c>j CO v \ VI
c i N 4* h i   ^ M CfJ N              -- ------      + A  -f> *>

                                      + * 01 «t      -- -- vt V\       sJ

                                      vi M 4* N      v i M -- K»              3
                                                                   ~2-
                                      2.       1\
                                               ^                    5

                                   I  3        3                      i
                                               c
                                                                   7? ?
                                               5.
                                               O                   7*

--o--o                                --o--o                       2

----oo                                ----oo                       to

                     OI0. 00| 000

               I0I|                   o o O o 00|I 00I o·I 00

-- <H         f -- V \ -- LO             + <J\ --    -- "I -- N>

N N> M N> M H K> K> uo tAJ oo vA> l o V>J OJ V>»                   N

CO W L*J u> 4> - ^ - ^ 4> N N K> N -f> -r* 4^ 4>                            I
                                                                             T
^     -r- ^  V] IM uo v ] ^           **  Ol VI      N» N <t v i   5"

VI -- -f> -- ^       -- IA> --        + vi --  --    v i -- 1° -1

   \

                                                          3-
                FiAi/sr£-0 "Tlr^K^ of- Qj*t*s Q* 44*e rcceiVd CAt+jkaf-t                                          Arte

                                                                                                             #70  ftecei/G
                                                                                                                   ftalG*j*

                      30           <J0             iro             lie    270                 330       3*0
                                                                                                  I
                      L.           L.              I               L                l_

PT              U1 0                                                                                    360zt opcr-Ai-Gj vAA.^^ck- AMe

FIO                        ··D 7«                                                                            rd.cci^er ^kv-NG^h

Fll                                     ,w 1 1**°                                                            TGtGlWl Clo^t*.*- 2.

FiL                                                      ! * ·» '                                            rtcciV^ eJGKvt^-'i

Fft                                                                      2**  25*0                           rtcclvtt clcr^t^i- 4-

FIV                                                                                      ^°° OiiD            trt.ctivGt tfJ^iAG^hST

Fl^K.lV^n       5 C^CnKc^l CAf^j                                                         3ir            34*

          Fio                                                                            32r *«·             0oar*t*$ Y^K^^i* Anii Cf^O
           F37
                           ;<?                                                                                 Of*richer M*«*5*44~ Amc
                                                                                                             f pA*4 -- «*nVe vclGA/tf */uxj*«.l-)

                      -r-                                          --r~                       --|--

                      10           16              tS-0            2J0              270            3*0  3*0
          "T3                  -o                  TJ                     T7                    T3

^|73                                                                                K< 1 25

2     * & 7»   <>. s^  x*      70   <*.     *  *0           F <»*=** _· & 2                      O
                                         2>
O                      * '*

«oo0                           «o                  t^                     *o

                               -4                                         -0

               u*                  u*          *            V4                  V#

3:                                                                                                   7>
                                                                                              w
r n -*- -*- -*~ O
                                                                                           70
%r
                                                                                                                  r>
I £2 S*
                                                                          1/3

      \V,                                                             VJ                            n

                                                                      &
                                                                 ^

                                                            Ui

                                                        ui

                                                     *
                                               w^

                   Co

                                                                              v -n                  C

                               JOz XX^ JXf _EXr -EX^' _JT=v                                         -4

                   i                                             "Tt                v -n

                    * * r*pBB                               A-

      £0               I -H-                                                              - O CS3
                                11
                                                                                           3

      E*. 5)           ft
              fcytre J 7

                                    ~TfA.*s)6Lfz>v R^i'vihe,,

                          -o  o--/          »ff
                              o-                 LS
                          -o
           F23 ::                                           Contv»l

                          _o

                     Rl

F32. :r                                 Plo On)
                                    R3

           9 RR3                        S*o ]RR3
F3+
                                    4= $ 15-30

F3C i                                        6 Co,N>              Vio
                                            PS-
                                                                  rIB*|| c^t«<t
                              Fi^uve-fkifr

           3  a< -- . r s » > < j

     Fit          F24              1F^r     11 1 F i f f p i 2 -                        F3<?

» " ^ * +          w B . r ^ i r w. r ^ z , j r r r fi ^                         Ti^ S L ^

              -|><|^M

Cio =£;?                                    C«"^*l vpeft.r  ?7

                                                                     P           -C-N)

                                                                     I VAA J
                                                        '3                                      TTav v i e w ^ « . T 5 l t "

\r\ter pores  ' 1 r--i ; 1 r-                                                                - D^'uc Moto*. UneHer-
                                                                                                                       WT WIO
              j m * ; mi --z :i ! mi --3i; ;t

              w i W2. VfJ

VJk««|;

              '»        /~N

              v·

                 4                                                                           fcecdVe                           J3

              £ i L * r * P S O * o l t r

               low e<                                 Spt*4                                  [DQD           @ & @. @:
                                                                                               0 AR
              Supply                               rc.3u.UV0v-                                              <S @E <s3: (gR
                                                                                                            <£fc (SB, (SE @E

                                           am;                                                        R l <£E o o; eg:

                                                                                    B«ue of           R2 <SE ess G3: sa:

                                                                                                                                   w
                                                                                                                                   tf
                                                                                                                                   ^
                                                   3<w                                                R3

                                                   ??                                                                              V

                                                                                                      R4

                                              VUM  »Z*»i 'PmTWM                                        R5"
                                           SI-55   L-J Cj                                             R.R3

                                                    Printer                                                 1^5 71 IU III IVY

                                                              [dm!

                                                                            U- -.J

                                                                                                            ~  ^  X I I

               Uv>)od(                             Key board
              Wheel?
         -J"

         H Fl                      ycr\4 cat** F | -- 8

                    cam- operahcM

                Fz  o>nha>ct\y ^ feceiv* Cam* F *\-20^37                        D.C. -fu-pplitj

                                   print- cams F il ·h-3C> 3T

         CfKry      CAMw.co¥%tTxx|-x  on              j^^                       -+    P6         e^htrnal +-£o/-£ov «r^pflv

                    pawl *ov* *k*f-f- tf/i ^ $ y ^ J ^£a*U                          -o.          +>TAl^Kl|tGd ^CltAV-A.pn fi4*al
                                                                                    0-t)
                                                                     /nr7            pi

         /All       J<5uK-poiVtj oh r^Ujj/ke^JcH-h^ bo*                             ft
                    and. KTF u«* only } u^^r ABCD E

                                                                                    p*       .i

           PC       pin*f Hie )^-p«i*f c^vAhc^W plvj       p - Con.A4LGtV9r\5*      -O           ejchcm*! +-6o/-60y Jupply
         -O                                                                          PlO         HIM in Tj^ v^^^ly
                    52H/ICLa^/?2« jwircK                    1 -T
         (+t)                                                                           ,P*
                                                            2. /Kl
         OH                                                                          oPn
                                                            3 AC
                                                                                     (-N)
                                                            + frawe
Kih^D><J iQ-n- vm yum twmCb^zl) wftu                                                -)~V+
                                                            r <?,M
                                                                                    ->. V-
                                                            4 +T '
                                                            7 bell
                                                            ? -t-N

                                                            <\  "trtvuimilr                      inV-GvnAl llOy ruppk
                                                                                                 UTG<A trtr 6 C«*t-A&hT A*a
                                                            \o +N
                                                                                                 vel^y S£l-l0 a**4 Hi-- iO
                                                           II - N J

rtXGire                                                    i i U rtl<o,

rttovrt         8^° I ^Me CAmiKAph or pAwL^ive jkAft        13 r t t t w e
                                                        T?y«. 1<|                             fcg-le^g. h^w^j &hr.

                  X F7                                          + sw-w

                                                            'O' r                  F2-6

                                                              I                                 EyhernoJ ClVtuiVy
                                                        + k.<.ubo-»nr( cutout-/                          +-E.R.

                                                           si-rr                   4> $-- - PT

                                                                                                ^O--T ° Lint a
                                                                                                          % W4

                                                        "  ^                       -M-

                                                           A Alt                                         EX

                                                                           SRI-IO  Fvo-tH-                      i  -O LCv\c L>

                                                             t                        t> 4-i    nhr(o}r)

                                                        ·f P»"»«\fev relay j                    Clonre.*.t

                                                 PS            Rl-RS

                                            f^Gh^Kp«y-

                                                        rgc<iye/4tcipW»

    Pu                  Pll

    I             F * T ^ receive
1 F i o  CAM
                    1 £A*n
l l g 7 o I a m C J S"?0

w                            ra.wl-£lr>tr£
If
         R<J*A/<

    PlO                 PlO

                                            CM/MSA
                              V              *"*
                              o           -

                              -N«» _         ~--- vS

                              oK»#                     -F               i n 11 n i im i i"         iMiiii immir
                                             -w                         1111 ii ii n iilIIi        I II I III II Mil Ml
                              K»       _     --- f
                              «J
                                            ----
    <*  3"                    Mr »
    *                         Mj             ~--- o
    t                         v%                   .o
                                                                                                ^         1
                              -M> ,,

                              wK»               <*

                                                4I                                                               to
                              P           ·
    %
                                             . r>

                              K»                                                                iuu nunuui

                              s--               v^                      IHIIIIM lllllll         -lllllll | M II 11

                                                -*                      -II I II I I M I M I I

                              -»          --w

                              *»

                                                  M

                              3                                                                 ?/

                                                                        5 s.
                                                                        n                                            ">

                                                                        o  T                                                        }

                                                                  o        J                    ^>                         9    31

5                                                                   O                           a CP =F.                   ?*^

                                                                     o                          P                          5

0   7) 7> 73                        s                      5                                    <?-

                         -*>                                                                    *

I

1*

        vO
        O
        ft
        0
        T

        v*»

        o                     1    v*                                                      70
        T>
                                   o      70                                          o
                                          re
                                    ft                                            <

        ^J                          *T    v£?                               12
        c
                                    s.                                    II
                                                                                       7>
        J                          C      7^                                              v]

                                   T      7?                            2                                                       f i -
                                                                                    o
        ?                           X vaJ                                            z.

                                    *
        ·<                         ^

        2?                                                                                                                      *
         I                                                                                                                      £

        75

                                          -oo-             -*                                                        o-5r       »
                                             z                  «
                                                                                                   <-C                          ft
                                                           -AWV^-1 ^
                                                                                                             L-I 3
                                                             5

                                                                                                             7>
